0. Introduction

In this video, I will explain what a manifold is,
and give three unusual examples: colours, trees, and probability distributions.

When you have a set of points, or observations in statistics,
you can represent them as a scatterplot, in the plane.

More generally, if you have objects with notions of distance and angle between them,
you can project them onto a plane, using random projections,
as here,
or some other dimension reduction algorithm,
such as PCA, t-SNE or UMAP.

But is the plane, a Euclidean space, the only "space" in which we could plot or embed our data?
Couldn't there be a a better one, more accurately respecting the "shape" of the data?

There are several simple alternatives.
Instead of a plane, the data could live on a sphere,
or a torus,
or a higher-genus surface,
or a saddle,
or something even more complicated. 

We can compare some of those surfaces using the notion of "curvature".
Flat (or Euclidean) space has zero curvature;
spherical space has positive curvature;
hyperbolic space has negative curvature.

On the plane, which has curvature zero,
the length of a circle of radius R is 2πR.
On a sphere, which has positive curvature,
the length of a circle is less than 2πR.
On a saddle, which has negative curvature,
it is more than 2πR.

(For those examples, the curvature is constant
but, for more complicated surfaces, it can vary, and be sometimes positive, sometimes negative.)

Flat, spherical and hyperbolic surfaces are all around us.
Corals are a visual example, but there are many others.

Let us now present a few surprising examples
of such spaces, or "manifolds".

1. Colours

Humans have three types of colour-sensitive cells in their retinas:
for them, colour is a 3-dimensional quantity.
These are the three "primary" colours.
It is different for other animals, who may have more (birds) or fewer (dogs).

There are different ways of representing those 3 dimensions,
different ways of choosing coordinates.
Computers use RGB coordinates, red, green and blue.
Printers use CYMK coordinates, cyan, yellow and magenta.
Artists use a "colour triangle" made of red, blue and yellow.

Are those representations equivalent or is one better than the others?
Are things that simple?

If you listen to painters, they will tell you that things are, indeed, more complicated.
Three colours, red, blue and yellow are not enough:
to faithfully reproduce the colours you see, you are advised to use two reds, two blues, and two yellows,
a "warm" and a "cold" version of each.
And perhaps also a few secondary colours, in particular greens.
It starts to look more like a disk than a triangle...

To complicate things further, those illustrations only show two dimensions of colour.
They are easily expressed in polar coordinates:
the radius measures saturation, the angle the hue.
But what about the third dimension?
We can make colours ligher or darker, i.e., closer to white or black.
While doing so, differences between hues progressively disappear:
as we move towards white or black, the disk becomes a point.
The colour space looks like two cones.
This is the HSL space: hue, saturation, luminance.

It is not quite what artists are using.
When fully saturated, not all colours have the same value:
some are darker, some are lighter -- pure yellow is lighter than pure blue.
We may prefer to use tilted cones.
This is the HSV colour space: hue, saturation, value.

While those colour spaces are more intuitive than the RGB one,
they still have a problem: they are not perceptually uniform.
The distance, measured in those spaces, does not reflect
what we perceive as the distance between colours.
For the same measured distance, in those coordinates, we can find pairs of colours
that are undistinguishable to humans, and pairs that are clearly distinct.

In their quest for a perceptually uniform space,
scientists, in the 1940s, measured, experimentally,
which colours were similar to humans and which were not.
For each colour, they defined a set of undistinguishable colours around it:
its MacAdam ellipse. 

In flat space, we would expect those ellipses to be disks, all of the same size.
It is actually not possible to find a coordinate system in which these MacAdam ellipses are disks: 
colour spaces are not flat -- they are manifolds.

We can, however, try to approximate them with a flat space:
this is what the LUV and Lab spaces are doing.
Their definitions are complicated and the coordinates counter-intuitive but,
in polar coordinates, they are very similar to the HSV space:
this is the HCL colour space,
which you should be using if you are making plots on a computer.

That was our first manifold example:
colour spaces are 3-dimensional,
vaguely look like two tilted cones,
but they are not flat.

2. Trees

On to our second example: trees.

A tree is a graph (a set of nodes, with edges between some of the nodes),
connected, and with no cycles.
One concern, when we draw trees in the plane,
is that the further we move away from the root, the less space we have to put the nodes.
This looks unavoidable: if all the nodes have the same degree,
the number of nodes grows exponentially with the distance -- but the space to put them,
i.e., the length of a circle, only grows linearly.

But what if we could draw trees in hyperbolic space?
We have seen that, in hyperbolic space, the length of a circle was larger
than in the plane, and it can grow fast enough.

Most machine learning algorithms need coordinates:
to feed them trees (and, more generally, graphs),
it may be preferable to put the nodes  
in hyperbolic space rather than Euclidean space.

3. Statistical Manifolds

Our third and last manifold is more abstract: probability distributions.
In which space do probability distributions live?
How can we measure the distance between them?

To fix the ideas, and keep the dimensions small, let us focus on unvariate Gaussian distributions.
Since they have two parameters, we expect a 2-dimensional space. But which parameters should we use as coordinates?
μ and σ²?
μ and σ?
μ and log(σ)?

To see if one of those is suitable,
let us imagine a ball, around each probability distribution,
containing "statistically undistinguishable" distributions.
How large should it be? If the standard deviation is high,
the distribution is imprecise, and the ball should be large.
On the contrary, if the standard deviation is small,
the distribution is more concentrated, and any inferrence on it
is more precise: the ball should be smaller.
These balls cannot come from the Euclidean distance,
with μ as the first coordinate
and some transformation of σ as the second
(because the distance would not depend on σ).

2b. Models for the hyperbolic plane

We have seen a few examples of hyperbolic space,
but these were surfaces embedded in 3d space.
What does the intrinsic geometry of hyperbolic space look like,
without the embedding in 3-dimensional space?
What would we see if we were inside that space?

We would still have a notion of "straight" line, but they would look a bit different.
For instance, here is the shortest path between the two probability distributions we were considering:
since distances are shorter when the standard deviation is higher,
first increasing the standard deviation, then changing the mean, and finally decreasing the standard deviation,
is much shorter than just changing the mean, keeping the standard deviation low.

This is the "Poincaré half plane":
the "straight" lines (they are called "geodesics")
are half-circles centered on the horizontal axis.
Vertical lines are also geodesics.

4. Conclusion

We have seen that "spaces" could be curved;
curvature measuring how large circles are
when the radius grows.

We have seen that colours (at least for humans)
formed a 3-dimensional space, looking like two slanted cones;
that its curvature could be estimated
by looking at MacAdam ellipses,
and that the HCL colour space was a flat approximation.

We have seen that trees (and more generally graphs)
were difficult to draw in the Euclidean plane,
because of the lack of space
as you move farther away from the root,
but that hyperbolic space provided a better alternative.

We have seen that univariate Gaussian distributions
did not form a Euclidean space, with coordinates (μ,σ²),
but a hyperbolic space -- the Poincaré half-plane.

5. References

To understand how colour works,
you can turn to books for artists,
for instance, those by James Gurney.

Material on "colour grading" for photographers,
such as Joanna Kustra's tutorial, may also be of interest.

Some books on "colour theory" may be relevant,
but most just contain an accumulation of supposedly universal
but arbitrary facts about colour.

The paper on the "colorspace" R package contains
a more detailed pressentation of colour spaces,
and advocates the HCL colour space.

Over the past few years, there have been countless deep learning papers
on hyperbolic spaces to embed trees or, more generally, graphs.

Most of the material on statistical manifolds, or "information geometry",
as the domain is called, are very technical.
I cannot recommend any of them.

6. Rigorous definitions

I have not defined, and even named, the mathematical objects we are dealing with.

I would have needed the notion of "metric space"
(a set with a notion of "distance"),
"continuous map" and "homeomorphism"
before being able to define "manifolds".

But these are not yet the objects we were dealing with:
we were looking at "Riemannian manifolds":
manifolds with some extra structure,
which eventually allows us to define angles and distances.

7. Links

Classical painting atelier: https://www.amazon.com/Classical-Painting-Atelier-Contemporary-Traditional/dp/0823006581
Color and light: https://www.amazon.com/Color-Light-Realist-Painter-Gurney/dp/0740797719
Colour grading: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mC8ol2-V7Ck
The HCL colourspace: https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v096i01

Graphs in hyperbolic space: https://arxiv.org/abs/1006.5169
Trees in hyperbolic space: https://arxiv.org/abs/1105.3925
Hierarchies in hyperbolic space: https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03417
Hyperbolic embeddings: https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03329
Hyperbolic Word Embeddings: https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.06546
Hyperbolic Word embeddings for Chinese: https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.10408
Coordinates in hyperbolic space: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/82c2559140b95ccda9c6ca4a8b981f1e-Paper.pdf

Information geometry: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X3cBhBA1nNw
